So I'm going to talk to
you about games today,
a little bit about the business,
and then we're going to dive in and
talk about a lot of the technical issues
and opportunities in the gaming space.
[Transcript missing]
and as these titles,
as these blockbuster game titles
start to enter the mainstream culture,
become part of the popular culture,
what we've also seen is we are
seeing the business of gaming
begin to look more and more like
the business of the film industry,
the movie industry.
This includes investing in extremely
high production value content,
fancy talent, fancy graphics.
Companies investing lots of money
to build proprietary technology,
game engines and rendering pipelines
and tool sets and things like that.
We're also seeing tremendous
energy going into the launch
activities for these new titles.
They're being launched the same
way that Hollywood launches movies.
And in addition,
when you find a hit title,
what happens now is that it becomes kind
of a repeat-until-rich sort of a process.
You take these titles and
they become franchises,
and it becomes incredibly important
because of the business that
they don't mess with the formula.
You want to kind of repeat
that initial success,
just like you see happening
in the movie industry.
Well,
because of this huge upfront investment
and because of the tremendous
pressure that this is putting
on the financial side of the business,
there's creating also incredible pressure
to get the products out the door.
And everyone knows about the
dynamic of hitting Christmas holiday
season with your title.
Well, the good news is you're going
to become rich and famous,
right?
This is what it's all about.
Well, your results may vary.
In fact, side effects include long hours,
low wages, burnout.
And we've been reading a whole
bunch of stuff on the web,
hearing about the kinds of conversations
that have been taking place at
some of the big gaming conferences,
and this is exactly the sort of
thing we've been hearing about.
Well, there's more to it than that.
When we look at the marketplace,
here's kind of the conventional wisdom
of what gaming is supposed to be.
It's 99% teenage boys
engaged in extreme acts,
with the rest of the market,
1% for the rest of us.
So clearly, this is not what the rest
of society looks like,
and we think there is another way here.
And we'd like to say this is the
time to declare your independence.
[Transcript missing]
We believe that Mac OS X could
be the ideal place for this
transformation in games to occur again.
In the 80s,
Mac was on the forefront of the
transformation of the music industry.
In the 90s, again,
the Macintosh was on the
forefront of a dramatic
transformation in the video world.
And we think that in this decade,
this could happen again,
and we're starting to see
signs of this already.
What I'd like to do now is I'd
like to bring Peter Grafagnino up,
and he's going to tell you about some
of the technical ingredients that
are powering this transformation.
Peter Grafagnino: Thanks, Tim.
Morning, everybody.
It looks like versus Dashboard,
we sort of did okay.
That's pretty good.
I realize there's a lot of traffic
with the weather this morning,
too, so thanks for showing up.
I'm going to talk about some of the
game technology we have inside of the
OS and kind of take you through it
from a couple of different slices.
First off, I'm just going to talk about
the basic technology itself,
the core tech in the OS,
and point at some
third-party stuff as well.
Then I'm going to talk about
development models and how games are
put together and kind of whether it's
a big budget or a small operation,
some of the ways people
can approach things.
I'm also going to talk about a new trend,
these game development platforms,
which are almost you can think of
them as Xcode for developing games,
very visual environments
where you can create games in
a very approachable manner.
And then I'm going to go through kind
of a laundry list of some really simple
best practices things about installers
and how to support our monitors.
There are just best practice things if
you are writing a game to keep in mind
to have a great Mac game experience.
[Transcript missing]
That's without.
It's a little bit subtle,
but you can get much cleaner video.
And when you see this
thing on a cinema display,
the efficiency of the
codec is incredible.
So for nice cut scenes, you know,
and these scenes are rendered with,
you know, film technology using
Maya and tools like that.
And having a great codec to preserve
all that quality is really nice.
So QuickTime sessions right after
this session in this room is going to
be a session talking about video and
QuickTime working together with OpenGL.
So you definitely want to see that.
And then there's the QT Kit session
as well on Wednesday later today.
Open AL.
So Open AL is our audio
solution for games.
It's built on top of
our core audio engine,
and it adds positional sound and powerful
APIs for games modeled after OpenGL.
So if you're familiar with OpenGL,
driving OpenAL is very similar.
And it's been widely adopted
across the game community.
In fact, you guys were kind of a little
bit ahead of us on this,
but we built the version into Tiger now,
so we have OpenAL support
on the platform,
and we're actively engaged.
With the open source effort on that.
So a bunch of games are using OpenAL,
and so we think it's a great solution.
On input, we've got the USB HID.
USB solved a bunch of problems in
terms of connectivity with devices.
We realize it doesn't
solve every problem.
And so this is an area, actually,
we're interested in
getting some feedback.
We realize game configuration,
controller configuration
UI is very difficult to write.
But we don't necessarily want to get into
your game and write your user experience.
So a way to think about it in terms
of object-oriented programming,
there's model, view, control.
You guys are going to own the UI in
terms of how your game setup should work.
But what can we do at the model
level to improve the abstractions?
So things like learn mode and mapping
of input points is easier to do.
So anyway, talk to us after the session
or at the games thing tonight.
and there's the email address for you.
The other thing we did in
Tiger is built-in haptic support.
So we worked with Immersion,
who's the clear leader in this field,
and we have force feedback
framework in Mac OS X,
so that's great for giving
feedback for devices as well.
The last section I'm going to talk about
in terms of core technology is tools.
Now, these tools come with the OS.
Obviously, Xcode,
you heard about the importance of Xcode.
Obviously, with the processor
transition we're undergoing,
very important to use Xcode.
The other thing is our
performance tools are great.
These performance tools
are cross-architecture,
PowerPC and Intel.
Great analysis tools for
developing code that runs really
fast on both architectures,
which we think is really going to be a
compelling story for us on performance.
And obviously, OpenGL Profiler,
hopefully all of you are
well familiar with this tool.
It's just a great tool
for tuning your games.
And if you haven't used it,
you probably have some orders of
magnitude of performance on the table.
But you can get just
by firing up this tool.
So definitely something
you should know about.
So those are the pieces of
kind of Apple supplies in the
OS in terms of core technology.
But in terms of building a game,
there's a few other pieces you need.
You know, so-called middleware,
networking is one, physics is another.
And I'll talk about a couple of those.
AGEA, Novadex physics engine,
they're very excited to
come to the platform.
Actually, they're going to be giving a
lunch talk today on their engine.
It's been ported over.
It's a great physics engine
optimized for multiple platforms.
So this is really a great thing
if you want to learn more,
go to their website or just
see them today at lunch.
Another area is networking.
I can get this thing to work.
There's both commercial
solutions like Game Ranger,
open source solutions like Open Play,
and a ton of other things in
terms of doing networking.
So there are some URLs to go check out
if you're just getting into this stuff.
So that's the kind of game
technology areas in terms of the
portfolio of the kind of tools in
the tool chest to build a game.
But let's talk about how that
maps over to various kind of
game development paradigms.
So we call this Pathways
to Game Development.
So here's kind of the big
high-end sort of Hollywood studio
model game development.
To be honest, not a lot of this occurs
on the platform right now,
but we think it's a great opportunity.
You saw Michael Johnson from
Pixar talk about how his team builds
really creative internal tools
for Pixar to help them create games.
We think there's a big opportunity
here for doing things like level
editors and asset management
in terms of custom development.
But we've got all the great content
creation tools on the platform.
We've got a great technology stack.
We've got Xcode.
We've got PowerPC and
Intel optimization tools.
So this is an area we think
could be very... very interesting
for the high-end studios.
The other thing that typically happens
on the platform is those games are not
developed natively on the platform,
but they're ported.
And so we've got a bunch of developers,
great developers, who do that for us.
And, you know,
this is a pretty vibrant community.
You know, a lot of the high-end games
you see come through here.
And they use all the great tools, OpenGL,
OpenAL, Build with Xcode, Tuneless Shark,
and OpenGL Profiler.
So that's a... that's a great way
to get into the mode of development.
Probably not a lot of you in
the audience are in this field,
but it's a critical part
of our success with games.
The last two I'm going to get
to are kind of a little more,
you know,
small budget ways of developing.
You know, these are things that a small
team could do with a great idea.
One interesting one is
Mac-only game development.
And kind of think of this as, you know,
you're not so worried about being
cross-platform or anything like that.
You want to leverage all
the technology Apple has,
not just the core stuff, like,
OpenGL and OpenAL, of course,
but maybe some new things like, you know,
iChat or the iSight.
Or you want to use Quartz Composer
to do something because it makes
you express your ideas more quickly.
And one example of a game like this is
the Big Bang board games from Freeverse,
where they've integrated iChat and
all these great OS X technologies
to build something you really,
you know, can't exactly have an analog
for on another platform,
but it just feels so much like a
Mac experience when you're on the phone.
And you're playing the game.
And I think that this is really
ripe for experimentation.
I think there's a lot of cool things that
could be done with iSight and OpenGL and
all the technology on the platform.
And so that's an area that could
be pretty interesting to think
about if you're thinking about
getting into game development.
The other thing that's really interesting
that's going on is what I'm going to
call downloadable game development.
These are ways of developing
games that have the wide reach,
and so there's a runtime
that runs across,
say, Mac, PC, consoles.
But the focus is on the
gameplay and not technology,
and more importantly,
the focus is on the creation
of the game and not so much
on technology development.
And these are kind of, again,
complete IDEs for games,
kind of as a way to think about it.
Like Xcode, you know, you press build,
your game comes out.
They have scripting languages,
very visual design tools,
the kind of thing, you know,
a few folks with some graphic design
skills and a little bit of logic
skills can come up with a game.
And so this is,
and we'll talk about a couple of these.
Over the Edge Entertainment is
a group in Denmark.
And you saw this engine,
the Unity engine,
demoed in Scott Forstall's
Mac OS X State of the Union talk.
The interesting thing about Unity is
you can kind of think of it,
it's almost like a Flash environment.
I mean, it's not meant for the
same things that Flash is,
but it's very approachable.
You know, a designer with some scripting
skills can put together some fairly
interesting content with this tool.
So it's an integrated editor.
It's only on Mac OS X.
However, their runtime lets you deploy.
You can deploy to other systems.
You can create console
quality games with this thing.
They've got a neat dashboard widget.
You can make your game
into a dashboard widget,
which is kind of neat.
They've got all the, you know, buzzwords.
Their, you know,
engine has pixel shaders and particles.
And it's built on that
Novadex physics engine,
so that comes with it.
And it, you know,
so it's just a great platform to
experiment with and play around with.
And in fact,
you may have heard of the game Goo Ball.
Goo Ball is kind of a fun game,
like the old marble
game that Ambrosia did,
and they did it with this tool.
And I think it's really a great
way to accelerate development.
There's another company that's
doing some really innovative stuff
in the downloadable game space,
and that's Garage Games.
And rather than me talk about it,
I'm going to invite Jay Moore up
to the stage to tell you about
what they're up to on the Mac and
give you an overview and a demo.
Thanks, Jay.
So Garage Games came to the conclusion
from a group of guys that have
been developing games for over
15 years at Dynamics that games
needed to be changed in terms of
how they're both made and played.
So we founded a company six years
ago that is out with the mission
to actually create a space where
independent development can
actually bring new games to market.
And the open platform for OS X is
an ideal situation for that.
We knew that there were three
things that had to happen for us
to be able to do this successfully.
The first one was we needed to create
AAA technology that was available to
anybody to be able to get access to this.
The kind of technology that was licensed
for a million dollars and required you to
pay a back-end percentage of royalties,
which is still the business model
today in the AAA game space,
is really what we were coming out
against with the Torque game engine.
Then we actually came to the next pace,
which was to get a community of people
together that were like-minded that
would actually collaborate together.
Today we can claim 100,000 members
in our community and 45,000
active game developers actually
working inside our environment,
actually solving solutions to
shared game design issues that
otherwise you'd have to have a very,
very large team in order to compete with.
And the third thing that we
had to do was actually have
a good go-to-market strategy.
Today we're shipping eight
successful OS X titles,
one of them that comes on
every Mac that's shipped in
the consumer channel today.
So we feel like we've
gotten on the right track.
We feel like we've gotten a long ways.
But right now with OS X 1.4,
or with Tiger,
we feel like we're at the very
cusp of actually breaking through
into where innovation can happen.
So I want to talk a little bit about
the technology that we came to.
And I just, real quickly,
how many people have ever heard
of garage games or the Torque
game engine in this room?
Okay, so from the show of hands,
how many people actually
own one of our platforms,
one of our engines?
So we've got about a 10%
market penetration in the room,
it looks like.
Maybe 15.
We want everybody to have access to this.
We want to democratize the technology.
Now this is not technology
that's easy to learn.
We've got students graduating this year
from colleges all across the planet,
where about a thousand of them will
have been in Torque for about two years,
and about another 500 to a thousand
have been in Torque for about two terms.
But it's about an 18-month learning
cycle to get completely up to speed.
And what we're doing is actually breaking
down those barriers and making it easy
for them to get to the top of the world.
And we're making it easier to access.
And probably the title that I'm most
excited about and we're talking about
lately is our Torque 2D technology that
allows you to understand how to build
a game quickly in a 2D environment
with state-of-the-art physics,
state-of-the-art actual
collision systems,
as well as using 3D rendering
in a 2D environment.
But the Torque game engine stands alone.
Its source is available.
So you actually get to
be able to build a game.
You can actually make your game
and customize it the way you want.
And rather than talking
about a lot of these things,
let me go ahead and show you just
a quick trailer-type demonstration
of the Torque game engine.
If I could see demo two.
So here we've got the Warzone demo,
which is our 1.4 implementation
of the Torque game engine.
And in this,
you're going to see just a brief
highlight of some of the core features
inside of the Torque game engine.
I do a one-day demonstration of the
Torque game engine that's about a 45,000
foot level overview of our technology.
We're going to do that in
just a couple of minutes here.
So here you've got the real-time scene
basically showing our cube map skyboxes.
You're going to see flying over here a
A moving vehicle where we've
actually used the volumetric
lighting and particle effects to
create an immersive environment here.
That was rigid body physics that
blew the barrel down on top of us.
You'll see that here we've got...
Connected to this,
an ability to mount particle and
volumetric lighting to the actual object.
Running through here,
we've got the computer-driven AI,
actually with just giving them a
destination and targets for the weapons.
So you're actually getting a real
immersive space with computer-generated
bots that you're playing against.
The tracer fire is guided by our
customizable projectile system.
So we have both the particle
engine as well as a projectile
system built into the engine.
This scene is going to
demonstrate what we're known for,
which is seamless interior
and exterior fly-through,
so that you've got portalization,
you've got as good a quality
input on the visual distance
as any engine on the market,
so you've got long visual
distance on the terrain.
We use a level of detail manager,
which allows your game to
have efficient rendering.
Here you're going to see the rigid
body physics working integrated.
One of the things that differentiates
the Torque game engine from
every other engine on the planet,
it was built on the Starseeds
tribes base of technology,
and we have the most efficient net code,
allowing for the most people to
play against each other online in
the same space with the lowest lag.
And that's something that
is a built-in play mechanic,
but also allows for you to create a
real immersive multiplayer game space,
whether it be a card game or whether
it be a first-person shooter.
Now this is going to
showcase ragdoll animation.
We're actually using this to be able
to have real efficient net code use.
So we use an animation as well as a
physics engine for getting that effect.
Now you've got a lot of weather,
and we're using AI pathing on this.
The vehicle physics are
actually built into the engine,
and right now you're seeing the terrain.
We've got a full terrain editor
built into the engine as well.
So there's literally 18 different modules
to our engine that you actually are
going in from lighting to mission editing
to control of the terrain as well.
So that's just a brief highlight
of the Torque game engine.
Available instead of
for a million dollars,
for $100 to anybody who makes
less than $250,000 a year.
We've literally got tens of thousands
of developers working inside of Torque.
There's 2,500 active projects
being worked on in Torque today.
100 of those will probably
become commercial projects.
50 of those we'll bring to
market over the next five years.
And actually OS X now represents
60% of our game sales to date,
and that's showing you that
there's an active market and a
great growing opportunity on OS X.
And if you guys want to find out more,
catch Jay after the
session and talk to him,
because he's got a lot of
resources for game development.
So the last section here I'd
like to talk about is what I call
Mac OS X game best practices.
And these are a lot of little
things you can do in your game to
enhance the Mac user experience.
The first one is sort of obvious.
I mentioned it before.
Use the tools.
I mean,
obviously with the processor transition,
again, very important.
Another thing that's true about
the tools is that since it's
all Unix and GCC under the hood,
you can actually use Xcode
as a development environment,
but then have a nice cross-platform
make-file strategy that you can
build in other environments as well.
So the fact that it's
layered on top of Unix,
some people have found
really interesting.
The next thing, support our displays at
their native resolution.
I mean, if you see a game running at
full res on a cinema display,
it's just jaw-dropping.
And a lot of games tend to
switch into lower resolutions,
or they don't understand the
native resolution of the display.
And the thing about LCD technology
is that when it's not running native,
it looks really bad because
it's a digital device,
so it really only has one pixel,
unlike a CRT where the signal
is analog on the actual glass.
So it's real important to support
our displays at a native resolution.
It's just going to make your
games look the best they can.
The other thing, use home directories.
A lot of games have tended to
install things like save games
in the folder where the game is.
People, you know,
reinstall or update and they
lose all of their stuff.
Put preferences in the per-user places.
And make sure that your game's
compatible with fast user switching
because that's another important thing.
So per-user data,
per-player data should always go
somewhere in the user's home directory.
Important thing.
Next one, package your application.
I mean, how many applications have
you seen that look like this?
You know, and Mac users, 8.3 file names,
I mean, come on.
This is, of course, a fictitious example.
This is no one's game, actually.
So we have great packaging
technology in the OS.
So here's that game all wrapped up
into one double-clickable thing.
Obviously, you know,
I know a lot of you guys
have done this already,
but I think it's real important.
Drag installs.
Again, if you package your app,
you can just drag it from me to you.
And you can just drag the media
onto the disk and it'll just work.
And the same thing the user
drags on to install is the
thing they drag on to play.
or thing they click on
when they want to play.
Another thing is smart
patches and updates.
So first when you're installing,
you know,
avoid compressing the compressed.
You know, that's not--it's a waste of
everyone's time and usually
a waste of disk space too.
And zip inside stuff inside tar,
inside DMG, inside--you know.
It's like, you know,
a Russian doll game to try
to get at the actual content.
And the other thing is, you know,
sometimes people have done
things like multi-step updates.
If you have to upgrade a game, you know,
obviously,
the media is huge to begin with,
so you don't send the whole thing out.
You send out a little update.
Then there's a readme file saying,
"Put this thing over in
system library and this thing,
and you're ready to go." And, you know,
if the user makes one mistake,
his game has got to
reinstall from scratch.
So obviously use the computer to
compute so it knows where to put things.
That would be a great thing.
So create smart downloads.
This is another technology
that we have in the OS.
You see Safari use this
for-- it has automatically
Internet-enabled disk images,
so when it sees DMG come down,
it can unpack it,
put up the appropriate user interface,
and automatically clean up
after itself when it's done.
So there's a great tech note
on this that's in Xcode of how
to distribute software using
Internet-enabled disk images,
so check that out.
Next thing is integrating with .Mac.
This is something we've started
where you can use .Mac as a
kind of storage place to hold,
you know, game ladders and rankings,
high scores, things like that.
There's an SDK for .Mac, the 2.0 version,
which you can go hear about later today,
but that's a really
interesting opportunity.
In fact, the Sims has a, you know,
place to go save your Sim on .Mac,
and so it's really pretty cool.
And with that,
I'd like to bring Tim back up for
some thoughts and take us through
the rest of the presentation.
Thanks, Tim.
Thanks, Peter.
Okay, so we've covered some of the key
technologies that Apple produces and
some very interesting new technologies
that are coming from the third-party
community to help support creating
some great games for Mac OS X.
But of course,
there's more to getting a game into
the market then and having success
with that than simply writing the game.
Now that's a lot of work, of course,
and that's the focus of most of
what we're talking about here.
But I want to touch on a few of
the other things that are relevant.
You know,
great games end up living within
a community of engaged users,
and having a successful gaming
business requires an intelligent
approach to getting to market.
In terms of the resources that
Apple can provide to help you kind of
get your game going and learn about
what's going on and then market it,
I think it's a great
way to get a game going.
And then market that game and develop,
help you build a community
around your titles.
There's several things you can do.
First of all,
we've got this resource where we post
game trailers on apple.com/games.
Number one game trailer site.
It gets a tremendous amount of traffic.
In addition,
every week we send out emails,
HTML-style emails to about
8 million customers covering
all kinds of different topics.
And then we have a lot of news
about Apple and QuickTime.
And we often build into these
communications information
about interesting developments
in the world of gaming.
And so this is a great resource.
If you've got some information,
you've got some ideas,
come talk to us and we'll
see what we can do there.
And then of course there's
the Apple Start page,
which draws people in and often
directs them into interesting parts
of the website that talk about
issues of importance to the gamers.
And the last one is in the corner.
We've got a quicktime player.
We've actually got a little
content guide that comes up
whenever you launch the player.
And we use that a lot to promote music
or video events that are coming up.
We also often use it to talk
about interesting things that are
happening in the world of games.
Now beyond that,
for the development community and for
the kind of the business community,
we've got this website at
developer.apple.com that's focused
on kind of a clearinghouse for,
gaming information and resources
and things like that that can
help you figure out what do
I need to do to develop a game,
how do I get that game to market,
and you know, just a bunch of good
information resources.
So you should check
that one out for sure.
And then lastly,
there is a tremendous amount of
information and sort of community
resources out on the web that can be
very useful for you as you're trying
to get your game into the market.
Have it become known
within the community.
And so you should definitely
check these things out as well.
They're very, very useful.
Now, I'm not going to spend a lot of
time today talking about the real
detailed aspects of how Apple can help
you get your game into the market,
but I want you to understand that
we have a lot going on at Apple to
help support game developers.
And this afternoon in this room,
Kristy Wyatt from the developer
relations team is going to be here,
and she's going to give you a real
detailed look at some of the things that
Apple can do to help you with your titles
once you've got the technology done.
And I think if you're in
the business of games,
this is a very important
session to come and see.
You'll learn a lot about
what's up with Apple.
[Transcript missing]